Description
Dear Threat Intelligence Analyst,
Quick heads up - we stumbled upon a shady executable file on one of our employee's Windows PCs. Good news: the employee didn't take the bait and flagged it to our InfoSec crew.
Seems like this file sneaked past our Intrusion Detection Systems, indicating a fresh threat with no matching signatures in our database.
Can you dive into this file and whip up some YARA rules? We need to make sure we catch this thing if it pops up again.
Thanks a bunch!
The suspicious file can be downloaded here. Unzip the archive with the password picoctf
Once you have created the YARA rule/signature, submit your rule file as follows:
socat -t60 - TCP:standard-pizzas.picoctf.net:58217 < sample.txt
(In the above command, modify "sample.txt" to whatever filename you use).
When you submit your rule, it will undergo testing with various test cases. If it successfully passes all the test cases, you'll receive your flag.

YARA (Yet Another Recursive Acronym) is a tool used for malware analysis, threat hunting, and identifying patterns in files. 
It's widely used in cybersecurity for writing rules that detect malware, based on textual and binary patterns found in files.

Why Use YARA?
- Detect malware families by writing signatures (rules).
- Identify packed vs. unpacked malware variants.
- Find specific API calls, strings, or structures in executables.
- Automate malware detection in SOC (Security Operations Center) workflows.

Basic YARA Rule Structure
A YARA rule looks like this:
rule ExampleRule {
    meta:
        description = "Detects Example Malware"
        author = "YourName"
        date = "2025-03-09"

    strings:
        $text1 = "malware" ascii
        $text2 = "hacking_tool" wide ascii

    condition:
        any of them
}

Meta Section – Stores metadata (e.g., author, description).
Strings Section – Defines text/binary patterns to look for.
Condition Section – Specifies how to detect the malware (e.g., if any string appears).

How to Use YARA
Install YARA
On Linux:
sudo apt install yara -y
On Windows (via Chocolatey):
choco install yara

Run a YARA Rule on a File
yara rule_file.yar target_file.exe
eg. yara suspicious_rule.yar suspicious_unpacked.exe

Use YARA for Threat Hunting
You can scan entire directories:
yara -r rule_file.yar /path/to/folder/

Where YARA is Used
- Antivirus & Threat Detection (Used by VirusTotal, FireEye, etc.)
- Malware Reverse Engineering
- SOC & Incident Response Teams
- Custom Threat Hunting in Enterprise Security

